Introduction to Textual Criticism 
This chapter sets forth the aim of this book and the definition, purpose, goal and importance of textual criticism. It describes the differences between Old Testament and New Testament textual criticism and defines the term variant reading. The job of the textual critic is very similar to that of a detective searching for clues as to the original reading of the text. It is reminiscent of the master detective Sherlock Holmes who could determine a number of characteristics of the suspect from the slightest of clues left at the crime scene. In our case the “crime scene” is the biblical text, and often we have far fewer clues to work from than we would like. Yet the job of the textual critic is extremely important, for we are trying to determine the exact reading of a text in order to know what God has said and expects from us. This book describes the basic principles involved in the process of determining the most reliable reading of the text. Let’s begin our journey with a definition of textual criticism. 
1.1 Definition of Textual Criticism 
It can be difficult for today’s student, who photocopies, sends faxes and reads hundreds of pages for assignments, to appreciate how painstaking a task it was to copy a book before the introduction of movable type. In reading any version of the Bible today, it is essential to understand that its books underwent many centuries of hand copying before the appearance of the printing press in the fifteenth century A.D. 
Unfortunately no original manuscripts (called “autographs”) of any of the biblical books have been recovered, and since no extant manuscripts agree with each other in every detail, textual criticism is necessary to resolve questions of variation. Alfred E. Housman, a text critic of classical works, observes that textual criticism is based on “common sense and the use of reason." Briefly stated, textual criticism is the science and art that seeks to determine the most reliable wording of a text.” It is a science because specific rules govern the evaluation of various types of copyist errors and readings, but it is also an art because these rules cannot rigidly be applied in every situation. Intuition and common sense must guide the process of determining the most plausible reading. Informed judgments about a text depend on one’s familiarity with the types of copyist errors, manuscripts, versions and their authors. It is a complex process with few shortcuts, but one that can be learned through systematic effort.  
1.2 Importance of Textual Criticism 
The importance of textual criticism is threefold. First and foremost, it attempts to establish the most reliable reading of the text. Second, in cases where a definitive reading is impossible to determine, it can help to avoid dogmatism. Third, it can help the reader better understand the significance of marginal readings that appear in various Bible translations. Textual criticism is not a matter of making negative comments or observations about the biblical text; instead it is the process of searching through the various sources of the biblical texts to determine the most accurate or reliable reading of a particular passage. It can, in fact, actually lead to increased confidence in the reliability of the biblical texts. Bruce K. Waltke notes that in the Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia (the most recent critical edition of the Hebrew Bible; hereafter BHS) approximately one textual note appears for every ten words; thus 90 percent of the text is without significant variation.’ According to Shemaryahu Talmon, even the errors and textual variations that exist “affect the intrinsic message only in relatively few instances.” Similarly in the New Testament, the fourth edition of the United Bible Societies’ (hereafter UBS) Greek New Testament text notes variants regarding approximately 500 out of 6,900 words, or only about seven percent of the text.” Textual criticism, therefore, mainly concerns itself with this small portion of the biblical text called “variant readings.” A variant reading is any difference in wording (e.g., differences in spelling, added or omitted words) that occurs among manuscripts.
Sir Frederic Kenyon (d. August 1952), a renowned New Testament text critic of the twentieth century, summarized the overall favorable result of New Testament textual criticism:
It is reassuring at the end to find that the general result of all these discoveries and all this study is to strengthen the proof of the authenticity of the Scriptures, and our conviction that we have in our hands, in substantial integrity, the veritable Word of God.
Many things have changed in the area of textual criticism over the last five decades since Kenyon. Further examination of the manuscripts from the Dead Sea area have revolutionized the study of Old Testament textual criticism, and more Greek manuscripts or fragments are now available for New Testament studies (i.e., manuscripts from St. Catherine's Monastery presently number 301; one of the newest manuscripts published, )"°, is a fragment of Hebrews 2:9-11 and 3:3-6).’ Even though we have more evidence today than any previous generation, the issues of textual criticism have become more complex than ever. Still there are relatively few significant variants in the Bible, and among these variants there is very little difference in meaning and content. To help put this into perspective it is commonly said that no theological doctrine or issue hinges on a textual variant? and that there are more differences between the various English translations of the New Testament than among the Greek manuscripts.
1.3 Differences Between Old Testament and New Testament Textual Criticism 
Old Testament textual criticism differs from New Testament textual criticism for two principal reasons: (1) the time period during which Old Testament manuscripts were copied is much greater, and (2) they have different starting points. It is no surprise that the history of transmission for the Old Testament is much longer than the New Testament's, but there are also other issues that make their histories significantly different.
1.3.1 Old Testament Transmissional History If Moses, traditionally dated to the fifteenth century B.C., wrote any of the biblical texts, then some Old Testament texts may have been copied for over three thousand years." The earliest extant copy of any part of the Old Testament is of two verses from the book of Numbers inscribed on silver amulets dated to the seventh century B.C. (see pp. 140-42). The next oldest texts, dated to the third century B.C., come from the Dead Sea area (e.g., 4QSam” [4Q52] and 4QJer*[4Q70]).” There are very few extant, early manuscripts or fragments of the Old Testament, but in contrast, there are about ninety-three manuscripts or manuscript fragments of the New Testament that are dated within three hundred years after the New Testament was written." This does not even take into account the numerous quotations from early church fathers.
Until 1947 one of the oldest, accessible complete Hebrew manuscripts was Codex Leningradensis (Leningrad Public Library Ms. B 19^), dated to A.D. 1008, though portions of other biblical books were available from possibly 100 to 150 years earlier (e.g., British Museum Codex OR. 4445 [of the Pentateuch; dated to about A.D. 820-850]; Codex Cairensis [dated to about A.D. 895]). But in the middle of the twentieth century things began to change and the number of early manuscripts of the Old Testament increased significantly, largely due to the discovery of manuscripts in the Judean Desert (commonly called the Dead Sea Scrolls). The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls revolutionized the field of Old Testament textual criticism because for the first time Hebrew manuscripts (or at least fragments) from at least as early as the first century B.C. were available for most of the Old Testament." Nevertheless, most of the earliest extant Hebrew manuscripts are still a significant distance from the autographs of the Old Testament. Not only is there a significant difference in the number of early manuscripts but also the transmissional history is different. Throughout the history of the Old Testament the Israelites appear to have had a group of scribes found [Paul D. Wegner] or priests dedicated to the job of preserving and maintaining their sacred Scriptures. This was often not the case for the New Testament manuscripts since the Christian church was persecuted during much of its early history, and manuscript copies made by professional scribes were very expensive. Many early New Testament manuscripts were copied by believers who desired to have their own copy of these precious works. Thus there are more manuscripts from this early transmissional period of the New Testament, though they may also be more flawed since they were not made by professional scribes. Sometimes they only had a few verses written on whatever material was available (e.g., potsherds, scraps of papyrus or parchment). The following picture is an ostracon (piece of broken pottery) from the seventh century A.D. found in Figure 1.3. The "poor man's Bible,"
1.3.2 Different Starting Points 
Largely because of the lack of early Old Testament manuscripts (in contrast to the plethora of New Testament manuscripts) and the differences in the transmissional process between the Old and New Testament manuscripts, the text critics of each of the testaments have been led to different starting points. James Barr explains it well: 
With a non-uniform text [e.g., the New Testament] we may find variant readings, and textual discussion begins from the variant readings, even if all of them “make sense.” With a text of high uniformity [e.g., the Old Testament], however, textual discussion will more frequently begin from the feeling that there is a “difficulty”; the procedure will be more independent of the existence of variant readings.
This makes the task of Old Testament text critics more subjective than that of their New Testament counterparts. P. Kyle McCarter notes the additional difficulty that a text may be corrupt even though it remains clear and easy to understand: 
A copyist who inadvertently strays from his text is much more likely to write something familiar to himself—something he frequently writes—than something unfamiliar. It is the nature of scribal error that it tends to produce the ordinary, commonplace, or “easy” reading. Corrupt texts, therefore, very often read quite smoothly.
This leads us to our next question, namely, what is the goal or aim of textual criticism? 
1.4 Goal of Textual Criticism 
Since no autographs are available today of either the Old or New Testaments, the general task of the text critic is to get back as close as possible to those autographs. This is no easy task, for textual criticism is also affected by highercritical matters, such as how and when a text reached its final form. 
1.4.1 Goal of Old Testament Textual Criticism 
It is difficult to know when the composition of a biblical book was completed and the transmission of the text began. This is complicated further by the possibility that these two processes may overlap to some extent. It was once thought possible to recover the ipsissima verbs (“actual words”) of the inspired writer and that these were the original autographs of Scripture. However, today most scholars recognize that it is impossible to trace the formation of any of the Old Testament books and that most have undergone later modifications.” Just three examples will suffice to indicate that even the most conservative scholars must allow for some modification of the original texts. (1) In Genesis 14:14, the city of Laish (Judg 18:29), or Leshem (Josh 19:47), is called “Dan” before its name was ever changed to “Dan,” and no manuscript evidence suggests a different reading." It is most likely that an editor later changed it so that his readers would understand which city was being indicated. (2) Deuteronomy 34 records the death of Moses, and verse 10 even states that “since that time [i.e., the death of Moses] no prophet has arisen in Israel like Moses,” which implies that this chapter must have been written sometime after Moses’ death. Jewish tradition holds that Joshua wrote this chapter.” Others suggest a Deuteronomistic editor.” But when was it added to the rest of Deuteronomy? Because all of the Hebrew manuscripts contain this chapter, it must have been added fairly early and then maintained by the scribes. (3) The phrase “and within yet sixty-five years Ephraim will be shattered from being a people” in Isaiah 7:8 has puzzled scholars for years since it does not appear to fit the context, even though its information is correct. Esarhaddon (680-669 B.C.) or Ashurbanipal (= Osnappar, 669-627 B.C.) came through approximately sixty-five years after the time of Isaiah 7 and deported more people from Israel (cf. Ezra 4:2, 9-10).” The most likely explanation is that this phrase was added by an editor or copyist sometime later (perhaps when these events happened), but once again no textual evidence suggests that this phrase was a later addition to the text. Since these parts appear in all the extant Hebrew manuscripts and ancient versions, they must have been put into the text fairly early and apparently were part of the authoritative text maintained by the scribes. Thus our understanding of the final form of the text must include at least these types of modifications of the text.
1.4.1.1 Final form or forms of the Old Testament text. 
Several modern scholars have adopted the goal of determining the final form or the final attested form of the text,” but even the ability to do this has been questioned. Both Emanuel Tov and Bruce Waltke have argued that there may be several original forms of a biblical text,“ an idea based primarily on divergent readings of parallel passages in the Old Testament (e.g., 2 Sam 22 //Ps 18; 2 Kings 18:13-20:19 //Is 3639; Is 2:2-4 // Mic 4:1-3; Ps 14 // Ps 53; Ps 40:13-17 [MT 14-18] // Ps 70) and the existence of divergent manuscripts. Tov states: 
These parallel sources are based on ancient texts which already differed from each other before they were incorporated into the biblical books, and which underwent changes after they were transmitted from one generation to the next as part of the biblical books. Hence, within the scope of the present analysis, these parallel texts, which are found in all biblical witnesses, including N [MT], are of particular interest. The differences between these parallel texts in M, as well as in other texts, could reflect very ancient differences created in the course of the copying of the biblical text, similar to the differences known from a comparison of ancient scrolls and manuscripts.
To argue for two separate textual traditions based on the differences in these parallel passages is only one of the possible answers. Table 1.2 examines the differences in the text of the MT between Isaiah 2:2-4 and Micah 4:1-3 in more detail. 
Out of 272 consonants in Micah 4:1-3 there are only thirty that are different from those in Isaiah 2:2-4, or about 11 percent of the letters. The differences between these consonants can be grouped in the following ways: several (12 consonants) are different because the words are out of order; some (25 consonants) use a different but similar word; one consonant adds a final nûn; one consonant uses a plural verb instead of a singular, and one adds a whole phrase (11 consonants). It is difficult to know why these texts are so similar and yet contain differences. These differences may indicate two original sources or one source that has been intentionally modified or unintentionally corrupted resulting in two distinct readings—either explanation is plausible," as is the case for many of the parallel passages in the Hebrew Bible." But a problem like the Lxx version of the book of Jeremiah, which is arranged differently and is one-eighth shorter than the MT, cannot be accounted for merely by different copyists of the same text.” A fragment of a scroll of the book of Jeremiah found at Qumran (4QJer" [4O71]) dated by paleography to the first half of the second century B.C. contains characteristics similar to the LXX,” suggesting that there were different versions of the Hebrew texts known at this time. However, it is not known how the different versions originated or if they were both seen as equally authoritative. Recent work on the shorter version of Job in the LXX has suggested that in some cases the copyist/editor intentionally shortened a Hebrew text similar to the proto-MT in order to make it more appealing to his Hellenistic audience.” Is it also possible that early Jews in Alexandria used the LXX because they could understand the Greek, but they knew that the Hebrew text behind it was the more authoritative text?
1.4.1.2 Fluidity of the Old Testament text. It appears that the Old Testament text was somewhat fluid (or subject to change) until about the first century A.D., as seen in the increasing number of matres lectionis (i.e., letters used to indicate vowels to aid in pronunciation of the text) added by the scribes, the interchange of similar words and the various forms of the text in existence by the second century B.C. One reasonable explanation for the addition of matres lectionis is that following the return from the Babylonian Exile the Jews needed extra help in understanding Hebrew since they had grown accustomed to Aramaic (e.g., see Nehemiah 8:8; 13:24). Following the Exile, when there were multiple sites of worship and learning for the Jews (i.e., Babylon and Palestine), it is plausible that variants of the Hebrew text may have developed because it was harder to keep strict control over the copying of Scripture. 
However, any amount of fluidity makes the text critic's task more difficult since there are more options to choose from (i.e., it is hard to determine the earliest form of a text if it continued to change). 
In one sense an established text makes the text critic's task easier because there is a standard against which to judge, as was the case from about the first to the fifteenth centuries A.D. But the problem with a unified text is that earlier and possibly even more accurate variations may have been removed by those who determined which text to retain. Is it possible then to determine a form of the Old Testament text that preceded the form in the first century A.D.? In some cases, yes, as the following illustration indicates. 
The BHS of Genesis 4:8 can be translated very literally as: “And Cain said to Abel his brother, and when they were in the field then Cain rose up over Abel his brother and killed him.” An obvious element missing from this verse is what Cain said to Abel. Several ancient versions or recensions (SP; LXX; Peshitta; Vulgate), as well as some Hebrew manuscripts include the phrase, "Let us go out into the field," which appears to be necessary for the meaning of the text. These sources may have included this phrase to smooth out the translation. However, it seems more reasonable that originally the phrase was in the text, but at some point in the copying process it was omitted from the MT (i.e., BHS; possibly because the eye of the scribe jumped from TTN right to "T1 both of which have several similar consonants). 
1.4.1.3 A complex goal. Although evidence of the earliest stages of the transmission of the Old Testament is extremely scarce, it is nevertheless a reasonable goal to attempt to determine the earliest form of the canonical text.” Waltke urges Old Testament text critics to “resist the temptation to lower their sights from the high ideal of recovering final text(s) that emerged in Israel before prophecy ceased in Israel." It is appropriate to ask which of the texts we know to have existed before the first century A.D. (e.g., Dead Sea Scrolls, Lxx, SP) most likely reflect the original form of the Hebrew text. For example, did Deuteronomy 27:4 originally contain a prescription of worship at Mt. Ebal as the MT states or at Mt. Gerizim as the SP has it?" Is the MT correct in saying that the Israelites spent 430 years in Egypt (Exodus 12:40) or are the LXX and SP correct that this period included the time spent in both Egypt and Canaan? Waltke concludes his discussion on the aim of Old Testament textual criticism as follows: 
The text critic's aim will vary according to the nature of the book. If a book had but one author, then the critic will aim to restore his original composition; if it be an edited text, then he will seek to recover the final, canonical text. If he turns up more than one final text, he will turn his data over to the literary and canonical critic to determine whether the text is in process of developing into a final canonical text or whether it existed in more than one canonical form. 
What I take issue with in Waltke's statement is whether there ever was more than one authoritative form of the text. A biblical book may have gone through some modification on its way to its final, authoritative form, and there may be times when we can identify these changes (e.g., "Dan" in Genesis 14:14; Isaiah 7:8b), but the goal of the Old Testament text critic is to determine the final, authoritative form, which then was maintained by the scribes and was later recorded in the canon. This position assumes Adam van der Woude's contention that there has always been a relative "uniformity" of the textual tradition in the religious circles around the temple, even amidst the “plurality” that developed before the turn of the century.” This goal pushes to an even earlier period than Waltke’s phrase “if it be an edited text then he will seek to recover the final, canonical text” (which we assume he dates about 300 B.C.). The final form of the text that later became canonical may not be obtainable in every case, nevertheless it is a plausible goal in the vast majority of Figure 1:4. P” a section of the Gospel the cases (over 90 percent), especially of John 18:31-33 dated to the early secgiven the number of materials discov- ond century A.D. [John Rylands Uniered in the twentieth century. versity Library]  
1.4.2 Goal of New Testament Textual Criticism 
1.4.2.1 The current debate. As with the Old Testament, the traditional goal of New Testament textual criticism to recover the text of the autographs has been questioned significantly by recent scholars. Were there several editions of some of the New Testament books? Or did Paul make multiple copies of some of his letters?” Eldon Jay Epp provides several lines of evidence that he believes may point in the direction of multiple forms of New Testament books (he calls this multivalence of the original texts): (1) our present Gospels used preexisting sources or precanonical versions, (2) some have suggested that the book of Acts has come down to us in two differing textual streams, and (3) the doxology in Romans 16:25-27 appears in some manuscripts in Romans 14:23, causing some scholars to suggest that the book may have had a shorter and a longer form. However, whether this is enough evidence to posit multiple forms of the biblical text is questionable, and it has the appearance of an endless hunt for supposed sources, as has been the case with Pentateuchal source criticism. 
Bart Ehrman takes a somewhat different direction and suggests that when an early scribe changed a text to provide a more orthodox theological viewpoint, he may then have created a new original text.” This raises several questions: What happens if the new alteration becomes popularly accepted by the church as the more authoritative text? Is the other virtually lost except as a variant of the text? Do we have two original texts? Ehrman raises a plausible viewpoint, but we have very little evidence that the early church was trying to fortify theological positions rather than trying to maintain an accurate text. There is, in fact, a somewhat similar example in 1 Timothy 3:16, where the Greek word oc, “he, or the one who is," has been changed to cóc, “God,” making the text much stronger theologically. However, the editors of the UBS Greek text suggest (based at least partially on the manuscript evidence) that this theologically stronger variant is a later reading. Ehrman and others suggest that these changes were made very early in the transmission of the text. While it is difficult to know what happened in the first hundred years of the history of transmission, there is little convincing evidence for such changes. The early church seems to have taken great care to monitor errant theology and their sacred texts (e.g., their controversies with Gnostics, docetists and Marcion). To give some idea of the authority and reverence that these sacred words engendered, one need only look at quotations from the early church fathers. For example, in a letter to the Corinthians (c. 95), Clement of Rome states: "Take up the epistle of the blessed Paul the Apostle" (1 Clement 47:1), which implies that they had in their possession an authoritative letter from Paul. 
Other scholars have also questioned the accuracy of the transmission process in the first century of the church. Helmut Koester states that “whatever evidence there is indicates that not only minor, but also substantial revisions of the original texts have occurred during the first hundred years of the transmission." Some even argue that the text should not be viewed as a fixed autograph but rather as a “moving stream”? or a “living text.”® Surely these views overstate the case, whereas the traditional view has much to substantiate it. While questions as to the original text surface in some places, a substantial amount of the New Testament text remains unquestioned and most likely represents the text of the original autographs or very close to it. While the writers of New Testament Scriptures were still alive it is unlikely that people could have changed their writings without their authors pointing out such discrepancies. Paul sometimes requested that his letters be circulated to other churches (Col 4:16), and thus the autographs must have been copied almost immediately; this would make it unlikely that others could modify the text without some traces of the originals existing. The early church also had a great reverence for these works (2 Tim 3:16; 2 Pet 1:20-21) and their authors (2 Pet 3:15-16), so it is doubtful that they would change their writings (see also Rev 22:18-19). 
1.4.2.2 The goal. A plausible goal for New Testament textual criticism is the recovery of the original readings of the text or in some cases it may be necessary to identify the earliest possible readings.“ It may not always be possible to know for certain that we have an original reading, but remember there is only about 6 percent of the Greek text that is in question. Bruce M. Metzger states it this way:
Although in very many cases the textual critic is able to ascertain without residual doubt which reading must have stood in the original, there are not a few other cases where he can come only to a tentative decision based on an equivocal balancing of probabilities. Occasionally none of the variant readings will commend itself as original, and he will be compelled either to choose the reading which he judges to be the least unsatisfactory or to indulge in conjectural emendation. In textual criticism, as in other areas of historical research, one must seek not only to learn what can be known, but also to become aware of what, because of conflicting witnesses, cannot be known. 
In some cases New Testament manuscripts date to within fifty to one hundred years after their autographs. For example, Rylands Papyrus 457 (â) is thought to be dated to about A.D. 125 to 150, and the Gospel of John ranges anywhere from A.D. 40 to 110;^ the interval between its authorship and extant manuscript evidence is thus very short. Given the reverence that the early church had for the New Testament and its authors, it would seem that they would try to maintain it as accurately as possible. 
The difficulty facing the New Testament text critic is weighing the numerous copies of the New Testament books and their variant readings. Eldon J. Epp explains how these variant readings may have originated: 
An apostolic letter or a portion of a gospel would be read in a worship service; visiting Christians now and again would make or secure copies to take to their own congregations, or the church possessing it might send a copy to another congregation at its own initiative or even at the request of the writer (cf. Col 4:16); and quite rapidly numerous early Christian writings—predominately those that eventually formed the NI—were to be found in church after church throughout the Roman world. Naturally, the quality of each copy depended very much on the circumstances of its production; some copies must have been made ina rather casual manner under far less than ideal scribal conditions, while others, presumably, were made with a measure of ecclesiastical sanction and official solicitude, especially as time passed. 
The plethora of New Testament manuscripts is a great benefit when trying to determine the original reading of the New Testament, for it is easier to sift through and evaluate the various extant readings than to emend texts with no evidence. Therefore the goal of New Testament textual criticism is to determine the most plausible original reading out of a large body of evidence. 