PART I

Introductory Material

Introduction to Textual Criticism

This chapter sets forth the aim of this book and the deﬁnition, purpose, goal
and importance of textual criticism. It describes the differences between Old
Testament and New Testament textual criticism and deﬁnes the term variant
reading.

The job of the textual critic is very similar to that of a detective searching
for clues as to the original reading of the text. It is reminiscent of the master
detective Sherlock Holmes who could determine a number of characteris-
tics of the suspect from the slightest of clues left at the crime scene. In our
case the “crime scene” is the biblical text, and often we have far fewer clues
to  work  from  than  we  would  like.  Yet  the  job  of  the  textual  critic  is  ex-
tremely important, for we are trying to determine the exact reading of a text
in  order  to  know  what  God  has  said  and  expects  from  us.  This  book  de-
scribes the basic principles involved in the process of determining the most
reliable reading of the text. Let’s begin our journey with a deﬁnition of tex-
tual criticism.

1.1 Deﬁnition of Textual Criticism

It can be difﬁcult for today’s student, who photocopies, sends faxes and reads
hundreds  of  pages  for  assignments,  to  appreciate  how  painstaking  a  task  it
was to copy a book before the introduction of movable type. In reading any
version of the Bible today, it is essential to understand that its books under-
went many centuries of hand copying before the appearance of the printing
press in the ﬁfteenth century A.D.

Unfortunately no original manuscripts (called “autographs”) of any of the
biblical  books  have  been  recovered,  and  since  no  extant  manuscripts  agree
with each other in every detail, textual criticism is necessary to resolve ques-
tions of variation. Alfred E. Housman, a text critic of classical works, observes

that textual criticism is based on
“common  sense  and  the  use  of
reason.”1  Brieﬂy  stated,  textual
criticism is the science and art that
seeks to determine the most reliable
wording  of  a  text.2  It  is  a  science
because  speciﬁc  rules  govern
the  evaluation  of  various  types
of  copyist  errors  and  readings,
but it is also an art because these
rules  cannot  rigidly  be  applied
in every situation. Intuition and
common  sense  must  guide  the
process of determining the most
Informed
reading. 
plausible 
judgments  about  a  text  depend
on  one’s  familiarity  with  the
types  of  copyist  errors,  manu-
scripts,  versions  and  their  au-
thors.  It  is  a  complex  process
with few shortcuts, but one that
can be learned through system-
atic effort. 

Figure 1.1 A scribe at work. At the end of an Ar-
menian manuscript of the Gospels, a scribe de-
scribes  his  hard-working  conditions,  saying
that his ink had frozen and that his ﬁngers were
still  stiff  due  to  the  cold  of  the  snowstorm
(Bruce  M.  Metzger,  The  Text  of  the  New  Testa-
ment,  3rd  ed.  [New  York:  Oxford  University
Press, 1992], p. 18). Another scribe graphically
describes  the  harsh  effects  of  his  painstaking
job:  “Writing  bows  the  back,  thrusts  the  ribs
into one’s stomach, and fosters a general debil-
ity of the body” (Ibid., pp. 17-18). [Bibliothèque
nationale de France]

1.2 Importance of Textual Criticism

The importance of textual criticism is threefold. First and foremost, it at-
tempts to establish the most reliable reading of the text. Second, in cases
where a deﬁnitive reading is impossible to determine, it can help to avoid
dogmatism. Third, it can help the reader better understand the signiﬁcance
of marginal readings that appear in various Bible translations. Textual crit-
icism is not a matter of making negative comments or observations about
the biblical text; instead it is the process of searching through the various
sources of the biblical texts to determine the most accurate or reliable read-
ing of a particular passage. It can, in fact, actually lead to increased conﬁ-
dence in the reliability of the biblical texts. Bruce K. Waltke notes that in the
Biblia Hebraica Stuttgartensia (the most recent critical edition of the Hebrew

1Alfred E. Housman, “The Application of Thought to Textual Criticism,” Proceedings of the
Classical Association 18 (1922): 67.
2See P. Kyle McCarter, Textual Criticism: Recovering the Text of the Hebrew Bible, GBS:OTS (Phil-
adelphia: Fortress, 1986), p. 18. 


Bible; hereafter BHS) approximately one textual note appears for every ten
words; thus 90 percent of the text is without signiﬁcant variation.3 Accord-
ing to Shemaryahu Talmon, even the errors and textual variations that exist
“affect the intrinsic message only in relatively few instances.”4 Similarly in
the New Testament, the fourth edition of the United Bible Societies’ (here-
after UBS) Greek New Testament text notes variants regarding approximately
500 out of 6,900 words, or only about seven percent of the text.5 Textual crit-
icism, therefore, mainly concerns itself with this small portion of the bibli-
cal  text  called  “variant  readings.” A  variant  reading  is  any  difference  in
wording (e.g., differences in spelling, added or omitted words) that occurs
among manuscripts.

Sir  Frederic  Kenyon  (d.  August  1952),  a  renowned  New  Testament  text
critic of the twentieth century, summarized the overall favorable result of New
Testament textual criticism:

It is reassuring at the end to ﬁnd that the general result of all these discoveries
and all this study is to strengthen the proof of the authenticity of the Scriptures,
and our conviction that we have in our hands, in substantial integrity, the verita-
ble Word of God.6

Many things have changed in the area of textual criticism over the last ﬁve
decades since Kenyon. Further examination of the manuscripts from the Dead
Sea area have revolutionized the study of Old Testament textual criticism, and
more Greek manuscripts or fragments are now available for New Testament
studies  (i.e.,  manuscripts  from  St.  Catherine’s  Monastery  presently  number
301; one of the newest manuscripts published, â116, is a fragment of Hebrews
2:9-11 and 3:3-6).7 Even though we have more evidence today than any previ-
ous generation, the issues of textual criticism have become more complex than
ever. Still there are relatively few signiﬁcant variants in the Bible, and among
these variants there is very little difference in meaning and content. To help
put this into perspective it is commonly said that no theological doctrine or is-

3Bruce K. Waltke, “Old Testament Textual Criticism,” in Foundations for Biblical Interpreta-
tion, ed. David S. Dockery, Kenneth A. Matthews and Robert Sloan (Nashville: Broadman,
1994), p. 157. See also Bruce K. Waltke, “Textual Criticism of the Old Testament and Its Re-
lationship to Exegesis and Theology,” in New International Dictionary of Old Testament The-
ology & Exegesis, vol. 1, ed. Willem A. VanGemeren (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1997), esp.
pp. 64-66.
4Shemaryahu Talmon, “Old Testament Text,” CHB 1:161. 
5The textual appendix of this Greek text only notes passages where there are signiﬁcant ques-
tions regarding the text. 
6Frederic G. Kenyon, The Story of the Bible, 2nd ed. (London: John Murray, 1964), p. 113.
7Amﬁlochios Papathomas, “A New Testimony to the Letter of the Hebrews,” JGRCJ 1 (2000):
18-24.

2005 Students Guide.book  Page 26  Thursday, June 17, 2010  3:07 PM


sue hinges on a textual variant,8 and that there are more differences between
the various English translations of the New Testament than among the Greek
manuscripts.9

1.3 Differences Between Old Testament and New Testament Textual 
Criticism

Old Testament textual criticism differs from New Testament textual criticism
for  two  principal  reasons:  (1)  the  time  period  during  which  Old  Testament
manuscripts were copied is much greater, and (2) they have different starting
points. It is no surprise that the history of transmission for the Old Testament
is much longer than the New Testament’s, but there are also other issues that
make their histories signiﬁcantly different. 

1.3.1 Old Testament Transmissional History

If Moses, traditionally dated to the ﬁfteenth century B.C., wrote any of the bib-
lical texts, then some Old Testament texts may have been copied for over three
thousand years.10 The earliest extant copy of any part of the Old Testament is
of two verses from the book of Numbers inscribed on silver amulets dated to
the seventh century  B.C. (see pp. 140-42). The next oldest texts, dated to the
third  century  B.C.,  come  from  the  Dead  Sea  area  (e.g.,  4QSamb  [4Q52]  and
4QJera [4Q70]).11 There are very few extant, early manuscripts or fragments of
the Old Testament, but in contrast, there are about ninety-three manuscripts or
manuscript fragments of the New Testament that are dated within three hun-
dred years after the New Testament was written.12 This does not even take into
account the numerous quotations from early church fathers. 

Until 1947 one of the oldest, accessible complete Hebrew manuscripts was
Codex  Leningradensis  (Leningrad  Public  Library  Ms.  B  19A),  dated  to  A.D.
1008, though portions of other biblical books were available from possibly 100
to 150 years earlier (e.g., British Museum Codex OR. 4445 [of the Pentateuch;
dated to about A.D. 820-850]; Codex Cairensis [dated to about A.D. 895]).13 But

8Waltke, “Textual Criticism of the Old Testament,” p. 65; Bruce M. Metzger, The Text of the New
Testament: Its Transmission, Corruption, and Restoration, 3rd ed. (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1992), p. 112. 
9Paul D. Wegner, The Journey from Texts to Translations (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1999), p. 213. See
also David A. Black, New Testament Textual Criticism: A Concise Guide (Grand Rapids: Baker,
2001), p. 13.
10Bruce K. Waltke and Michael O’Connor, An Introduction to Biblical Hebrew Syntax (Winona

Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns, 1990), p. 4.

11Frank M. Cross, “The Oldest Manuscripts from Qumran,” JBL 74 (1955): 147-72.
12Kurt Aland and Barbara Aland, The Text of the New Testament, trans. Erroll F. Rhodes (Grand

Rapids: Eerdmans, 1979), chart on p. 81.

13The Aleppo Codex dates to about A.D. 930, but was not accessible until more recently.


DEAD SEA SCROLLS
Since 1947 at least 900 manuscripts have been found in caves along the
western shore of the Dead Sea. The largest number of these manuscripts
were at a site commonly known as Qumran, leading them to be referred to
as the Qumran scrolls. From Cave 4 came over 500 documents, many of
which were either simply fragments or unreadable (see ﬁg. 1.2). The manu-
scripts are generally dated between 250 B.C. to A.D. 135. About one quar-
ter are portions of biblical texts.a Some of the biblical books were repre-
sented by a great number of copies (e.g., the book of Isaiah had twenty-one
different  manuscripts),  whereas  Esther  and  possibly  Nehemiah  were  not
represented at all. It is uncertain whether the omission of the books of Esther
and Nehemiah was intentional or accidental.b

aJames C. VanderKam, The Dead Sea Scrolls Today (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1994),
p. 31.
bMost scholars believe that Ezra and Nehemiah were considered one book at this time
based on the following information: (1) In Contra Apion 1:8 (dated to A.D. 93-95) Jo-
sephus states there are twenty-two canonical books. (2) Jubilees 2:23 refers to twenty-
two canonical books (dated between 170-140 B.C.). (3) 4 Ezra 14:44-46 says there are
twenty-four canonical books (dated to the ﬁrst century A.D.). In order to arrive at twenty-
two  canonical  books  we  must  combine  the  following  books:  (1)  Judges  and  Ruth,
(2) 1-2 Samuel, (3) 1-2 Kings, (4) Jeremiah and Lamentations, (5) the Twelve Minor
Prophets (generally called The Book of the Twelve), (6) Ezra and Nehemiah, and (7)
1-2 Chronicles. To achieve twenty-four canonical books Judges and Ruth as well as Jer-
emiah and Lamentations are considered separate books.

in the middle of the twentieth century things began to change and the number
of early manuscripts of the Old Testament increased signiﬁcantly, largely due
to  the  discovery  of  manuscripts  in  the  Judean  Desert  (commonly  called  the
Dead Sea Scrolls). 

The discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls revolutionized the ﬁeld of Old Testa-
ment  textual  criticism  because  for  the  ﬁrst  time  Hebrew  manuscripts  (or  at
least fragments) from at least as early as the ﬁrst century B.C. were available for
most of the Old Testament.14 Nevertheless, most of the earliest extant Hebrew
manuscripts are still a signiﬁcant distance from the autographs of the Old Tes-
tament.

Not  only  is  there  a  signiﬁcant  difference  in  the  number  of  early  manu-
scripts but also the transmissional history is different. Throughout the his-
tory of the Old Testament the Israelites appear to have had a group of scribes

14James C. VanderKam, The Dead Sea Scrolls Today (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1994), p. 31.

2005 Students Guide.book  Page 28  Thursday, June 17, 2010  3:07 PM


Figure 1.2. Cave 4 at Qumran in which approximately 400 to 600 ancient manuscripts were
found [Paul D. Wegner]

or  priests  dedicated  to  the  job  of  preserving  and  maintaining  their  sacred
Scriptures. This was often not the case for the New Testament manuscripts
since the Christian church was persecuted during much of its early history,
and  manuscript  copies  made  by  professional  scribes  were  very  expensive.
Many early New Testament manuscripts were copied by believers who de-
sired to have their own copy of these precious works. Thus there are more
manuscripts  from  this  early  trans-
missional period of the New Testa-
ment,  though  they  may  also  be
more  ﬂawed  since  they  were  not
made  by  professional  scribes.
Sometimes  they  only  had  a  few
verses  written  on  whatever  mate-
rial  was  available  (e.g.,  potsherds,
scraps  of  papyrus  or  parchment).
The  following  picture  is  an  ostra-
con (piece of broken pottery) from
the  seventh  century  A.D.  found  in
Upper Egypt with an inscription of
Luke  22:70-71,  sometimes  referred
to as “the poor man’s Bible.”

Figure 1.3. The “poor man’s Bible,” an ostra-
con of Luke 22:70-71 from the seventh century
A.D. [Institut Français d’archéologie orientale]


1.3.2 Different Starting Points

Largely because of the lack of early Old Testament manuscripts (in contrast to
the plethora of New Testament manuscripts) and the differences in the trans-
missional process between the Old and New Testament manuscripts, the text
critics  of  each  of  the  testaments  have  been  led  to  different  starting  points.
James Barr explains it well:

With a non-uniform text [e.g., the New Testament] we may ﬁnd variant readings,
and textual discussion begins from the variant readings, even if all of them “make
sense.” With a text of high uniformity [e.g., the Old Testament], however, textual
discussion will more frequently begin from the feeling that there is a “difﬁculty”;
the procedure will be more independent of the existence of variant readings.15

This makes the task of Old Testament text critics more subjective than that
of their New Testament counterparts. P. Kyle McCarter notes the additional
difﬁculty that a text may be corrupt even though it remains clear and easy to
understand:

A  copyist  who  inadvertently  strays  from  his  text  is  much  more  likely  to  write
something  familiar  to  himself—something  he  frequently  writes—than  some-
thing unfamiliar. It is the nature of scribal error that it tends to produce the ordi-
nary, commonplace, or “easy” reading. Corrupt texts, therefore, very often read
quite smoothly.16

This leads us to our next question, namely, what is the goal or aim of textual

criticism?

1.4 Goal of Textual Criticism

Since no autographs are available today of either the Old or New Testaments,
the general task of the text critic is to get back as close as possible to those au-
tographs. This is no easy task, for textual criticism is also affected by higher-
critical matters, such as how and when a text reached its ﬁnal form. 

1.4.1 Goal of Old Testament Textual Criticism

It is difﬁcult to know when the composition of a biblical book was completed
and the transmission of the text began. This is complicated further by the pos-
sibility  that  these  two  processes  may  overlap  to  some  extent.  It  was  once
thought possible to recover the ipsissima verbs (“actual words”) of the inspired
writer and that these were the original autographs of Scripture. However, today
most scholars recognize that it is impossible to trace the formation of any of the

15James Barr, Comparative Philology and the Text of the Old Testament: With Additions and Correc-

tions (Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns, 1987), p. 4.

16McCarter, Textual Criticism, p. 14.

2005 Students Guide.book  Page 30  Thursday, June 17, 2010  3:07 PM


Old Testament books and that most have undergone later modiﬁcations.17 Just
three examples will sufﬁce to indicate that even the most conservative scholars
must allow for some modiﬁcation of the original texts. (1) In Genesis 14:14, the
city of Laish (Judg 18:29), or Leshem (Josh 19:47), is called “Dan” before its name
was ever changed to “Dan,” and no manuscript evidence suggests a different
reading.18  It  is  most  likely  that  an  editor  later  changed  it  so  that  his  readers
would understand which city was being indicated. (2) Deuteronomy 34 records
the death of Moses, and verse 10 even states that “since that time [i.e., the death
of Moses] no prophet has arisen in Israel like Moses,” which implies that this
chapter must have been written sometime after Moses’ death. Jewish tradition
holds that Joshua wrote this chapter.19 Others suggest a Deuteronomistic edi-
tor.20 But when was it added to the rest of Deuteronomy? Because all of the He-
brew manuscripts contain this chapter, it must have been added fairly early and
then maintained by the scribes. (3) The phrase “and within yet sixty-ﬁve years
Ephraim will be shattered from being a people” in Isaiah 7:8 has puzzled schol-
ars for years since it does not appear to ﬁt the context, even though its informa-
tion is correct. Esarhaddon (680-669 B.C.) or Ashurbanipal (= Osnappar, 669-627
B.C.) came through approximately sixty-ﬁve years after the time of Isaiah 7 and
deported more people from Israel (cf. Ezra 4:2, 9-10).21 The most likely explana-
tion is that this phrase was added by an editor or copyist sometime later (per-
haps when these events happened), but once again no textual evidence suggests
that this phrase was a later addition to the text. Since these parts appear in all the
extant Hebrew manuscripts and ancient versions, they must have been put into
the  text  fairly  early  and  apparently  were  part  of  the  authoritative  text  main-
tained by the scribes. Thus our understanding of the ﬁnal form of the text must
include at least these types of modiﬁcations of the text.

17Bruce  K.  Waltke,  “Aims  of  Old  Testament  Textual  Criticism,”  WTJ  51  (1989):  93.  See  also
Michael Fishbane, Biblical Interpretation in Ancient Israel (Oxford: Clarendon, 1985), pp. 44-88.
18Derek Kidner, Genesis: An Introduction and Commentary, TOTC (Downers Grove, Ill.: Inter-
Varsity Press, 1967), p. 16; Bruce K. Waltke and Cathi J. Fredricks, Genesis. A Commentary
(Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2001), pp. 232; Claus Westermann, Genesis 12-36. A Commen-
tary, trans. John J. Scullion (Minnneapolis: Augsburg, 1985), p. 201.

19b. B. Bat. 14b and Ibn Ezra (Joseph H. Hertz, ed., The Pentateuch and Haftorahs. Hebrew Text
English Translation and Commentary [London: Soncino, 1972], p. 916. Josephus believed that
Moses himself wrote this chapter (Antiquities of the Jews, 4.8.48).

20Andrew D. H. Mayes, Deuteronomy, NCBC (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1979), pp. 47, 413-14.
21Joseph Blenkinsopp, Isaiah 1-39: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary, AB 19
(New York: Doubleday, 2000), p. 229; Brevard S. Childs, Isaiah, OTL (Louisville, Ky.: West-
minster  John  Knox,  2001),  p.  65;  Ronald  E.  Clements,  Isaiah  1-39,  NCBC  (Grand  Rapids:
Eerdmans,  1980),  p.  85;  J.  Alec  Motyer,  Isaiah:  An  Introduction  and  Commentary,  TOTC
(Downers Grove, Ill.: InterVarsity Press, 1999), p. 76; John N. Oswalt, The Book of Isaiah 1-39,
NICOT (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1986), pp. 201-2; Hans Wildberger, Isaiah 1-12: A Com-
mentary, trans. Thomas H. Trapp (Minneapolis: Fortress, 1991), p. 302.


Table 1.1. Perceived Goals of Old Testament Textual Criticism

Goal

Description

Scholars

1. Restore the origi-
nal composition 

The goal is to recover the author’s ipsissima 
verba, “to establish the text as the author 
wished to have it presented to the public.”

Most older textual 
critics, Harrisona

2. Restore the ﬁnal 
form of the text 
(most modern tex-
tual critics)

The goal is to recover the ipsissima verba of 
the ﬁnal redactor, assuming that the book 
has gone through some evolutionary process 
to get to this ﬁnal form.

Brotzman,b Deist,c 
Würthweind

3. Restore the earli-
est attested form

The goal is to recover the earliest attested 
form of the text for which there are actual 
textual witnesses. Generally the text in view 
is from the second century B.C., and conjec-
tural emendations are not allowed.

Hebrew University 
Bible Project, UBS 
Hebrew Old Testa-
ment Text Project

4. Restore accepted 
texts (plural)

The goal is to recover the texts as they were 
accepted by particular religious communi-
ties. Each text may differ according to the 
authoritative standard of its particular com-
munity. 

James Sanders, 
Brevard Childs 
(though he centers 
on the MT text 
accepted by the Jews)

5. Restore ﬁnal texts 
(plural)

6. Restore all various 
“literary editions” of 
the Old Testament

The goal is to recover the ﬁnal form of the 
text. In some books or pericopes this may 
mean that there are several equally valid 
texts of the Old Testament that need to be 
restored.

The goal is not to just reproduce the MT, but 
to restore all the “literary editions” of the 
various writings that can be discerned in the 
evolution of the Hebrew Bible (e.g., the LXX, 
SP, MT, as well as all others represented at 
Qumran and other places).

Emanuel Tov,e Bruce 
K. Waltkef

Eugene Ulrichg

aRoland K. Harrison, Introduction to the Old Testament (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1969), p. 259.
bEllis R. Brotzman, Old Testament Textual Criticism: A Practical Introduction (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1994), pp. 
124, 129.
cFerdinand E. Deist, Toward the Text of the Old Testament (Pretoria: Kerkboekhandel Transvaal, 1978), p. 24. 
dErnst Würthwein, The Text of the Old Testament. An Introduction to the Biblia Hebraica, trans. Erroll F. 
Rhodes, 2nd ed. (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1995), p. 105.
eEmanuel Tov, Textual Criticism of the Hebrew Bible, 2nd ed. (Minneapolis: Fortress, 2001), p. 171.
fWaltke, “Old Testament Textual Criticism,” p. 175.
gEugene Ulrich, “Multiple Literary Editions: Reﬂections Toward a Theory of the History of the Biblical 
Text,” in Current Research and Technological Developments on the Dead Sea Scrolls: Conference on the Texts from 
the Judaean Desert, Jerusalem, 30 April 1995, ed. Donald W. Perry and Stephen D. Ricks, Studies on the 
Texts of the Desert of Judah 20 (Leiden: Brill, 1996), pp. 78-105. Ulrich disagrees signiﬁcantly with Tov: 
“Thus the target of ‘textual criticism of the Hebrew Bible’ is not a single text. The purpose or function of 
textual criticism is to reconstruct the history of the texts that eventually become the biblical collection in 
both its literary growth and its scribal transmission; it is not just to judge individual variants in order to 
determine which were ‘superior’ or ‘original.’ The ‘original text’ is a distracting concept for the Hebrew 
Bible” (pp. 98-99).

2005 Students Guide.book  Page 32  Thursday, June 17, 2010  3:07 PM


Table 1.1 summarizes and augments the history of what scholars believe to
be  the  goal  of  Old  Testament  textual  criticism  as  described  in  an  article  by
Bruce K. Waltke.22 

1.4.1.1 Final form or forms of the Old Testament text. Several modern scholars
have adopted the goal of determining the ﬁnal form or the ﬁnal attested form
of the text,23 but even the ability to do this has been questioned. Both Emanuel
Tov and Bruce Waltke have argued that there may be several original forms of
a biblical text,24 an idea based primarily on divergent readings of parallel pas-
sages in the Old Testament (e.g., 2 Sam 22 // Ps 18; 2 Kings 18:13-20:19 // Is 36-
39; Is 2:2-4 // Mic 4:1-3; Ps 14 // Ps 53; Ps 40:13-17 [MT 14-18] // Ps 70) and the
existence of divergent manuscripts. Tov states:

These  parallel  sources  are  based  on  ancient  texts  which  already  differed  from
each other before they were incorporated into the biblical books, and which un-
derwent changes after they were transmitted from one generation to the next as
part of the biblical books. Hence, within the scope of the present analysis, these
parallel texts, which are found in all biblical witnesses, including Mà [MT], are of
particular interest. The differences between these parallel texts in Mà, as well as in
other texts, could reﬂect very ancient differences created in the course of the copy-
ing of the biblical text, similar to the differences known from a comparison of an-
cient scrolls and manuscripts.25

To  argue  for  two  separate  textual  traditions  based  on  the  differences  in
these parallel passages is only one of the possible answers. Table 1.2 examines
the differences in the text of the MT between Isaiah 2:2-4 and Micah 4:1-3 in
more detail.

Out of 272 consonants in Micah 4:1-3 there are only thirty that are different
from those in Isaiah 2:2-4, or about 11 percent of the letters. The differences be-
tween these consonants can be grouped in the following ways: several (12 con-
sonants) are different because the words are out of order; some (25 consonants)
use a different but similar word; one consonant adds a ﬁnal nu=n; one consonant
uses a plural verb instead of a singular, and one adds a whole phrase (11 con-
sonants). It is difﬁcult to know why these texts are so similar and yet contain
differences. These differences may indicate two original sources or one source

22Waltke,  “Aims  of  Old  Testament  Textual  Criticism,”  pp.  93-108.  See  also  Al  Wolters,
“The Text of the Old Testament,” in The Faces of Old Testament Studies: A Survey of Con-
temporary  Approaches,  ed.  David  W.  Baker  and  Bill  T.  Arnold  (Grand  Rapids:  Baker,
1999), pp. 31-32.